## An-Open-Letter to the OWASP Board from the OWASP Chapters 

Dear OWASP Board of Directors,

We write to you today as a concerned group of OWASP Leaders.  Our motivations for writing this are not based out of angst or malice.  We genuinely want to make OWASP a better place and trust that you want to do the same.  It is with that goal in mind that we lay out the following constructive criticisms and proposals for the future.  It is our belief that these issues need to be addressed in an open and transparent manner.  These are things that we should have honest and inclusive discussions about in order to move the needle forward for our organization.

Topic #1 - Transparency
OWASP lists “Open” as one of its Core Values.  It further defines it as “Everything at OWASP is radically transparent from our finances to our code.”  Not just “transparent”, but “radically transparent”.  To us, this means that we default to transparency.  Board communications should be transparent.  Staff communications should be transparent.  There are standard, accepted best practices for non-profit 501(c)3 organizations and we should do better to align with them for our finances, operations, conflict resolution, volunteer relationships, sponsors and sponsorships, scholarships, grants, and public engagements.  We believe that Board votes, meeting minutes, budgets, and all other relevant documentation should be discussed openly and publicly with the results published within a reasonable timeframe of days, not weeks, months, or years, as has happened in some cases.  As leaders, we should be able to look at any time and determine how much cash OWASP has on hand.  We should be able to determine how much any given chapter, project, or committee has in their account.  To be clear, we understand that there are situations that call for confidentiality, but these should be few and far between.  We believe that the Foundation is failing in its promise to deliver acceptable standards with radical transparency to us, as members, and we feel that we deserve better.

Topic #2 - Revenue and Expenses
The town hall meetings have been full of hyperbole about how the Foundation is in dire financial straits.  While various members of our community have asked for transparency into our current financial state (see above), we have not received this and, therefore, the data presented by the staff is the only data we have.  We believe that the data tells a different story.  The slides presented by the staff show $3,229,507 in income sources and $2,755,911 in expenses.  Assuming that the data provided here is factual, and no data is missing, that comes out to a net profit of $473,596/yr.  We recognize that a significant portion of that profit is allocated to the chapters via profit splits on regional events so we can get that number by taking the regional event revenue of $848,507 and subtracting the regional event expenses of $560,500.  That gives us the net profit of $298,007 for our regional events.  With the 90/10 profit sharing split, $268,206 of that goes to the chapters running the event and $29,800 goes to the Foundation.  From this, we can conclude two things.  First, regional events are contributing almost $30,000 per year to the Foundation.  Second, based on the numbers presented by the staff, the OWASP Foundation budget shows a total annual profit of $205,390 ($473,596 total net - $268,206 to chapters).  Again, while the Board Voting History shows that a budget was approved in May 2018, it has not been posted publicly, and therefore we can only assume that the data the staff is presenting reflects what was approved.




Topic #3 - Financial Sustainability
If the numbers presented reflect our budget reality, then we are delighted to see that the Board has moved from a “net zero”, or even “net negative”, budgeting model to one that will provide a surplus of funds.  We believe that past budgeting models were broken in that they intentionally spent more money than we took in, and those poor financial decisions created this situation of instability.  The good news is that with a budgeted net profit of roughly $205k, we go from $200k in the bank and 3 months of operating cash on hand (per the staff presentation) to $405k in the bank and more than 6 months of operating cash on hand after one year with this operating model.  We believe that this single act of having a “net positive” budget will put us in a much better position and future years of said budgeting frugalness will provide us with an even better runway of operating cash.  We do not believe that taking money earned by chapters, and allocated in our chapter accounts, will solve any problems other than short-term cash flow, and the chapters are already willing to allow the Foundation to temporarily use these funds in order to pay bills, without asking, until such time as the Foundation has a longer runway of operating cash on hand.

Topic #4 - “Ring Fenced” Funds
A promise was made by the Board to the OWASP Chapters and Projects many years ago that they could raise their own funds and an “account” would be held for them with those funds.  It is the promise of these funds, and what they are capable of doing for our chapter members, that incentivizes us to work hard in order to obtain them.  The reality is that prior to the creation of these accounts, our chapters struggled to get financial support from the Foundation.  It was hard enough to get a stack of pizzas for our meetings, let alone to justify holding a training.  We would urge the Board to view these funds as a benefit to the Foundation as the current account model enables us to not take money from the Foundation, be self-sufficient, and do far more for our members than we could without it.  We would remind the Board that another of our Core Values is Innovation and that having these funds has been the source of innovations such as catalogs of meeting videos, conferences, and more.  We would also remind the Board that OWASP’s Core Purpose is to “Be the thriving global community that drives visibility and evolution in the safety and security of the world’s software.”  These funds are actively being used in order to directly serve this purpose.  Many of these events are even run for low or no cost to the community which helps to give visibility and credibility to the OWASP brand.  Furthermore, some of these funds were contributions made by companies with the expressed interest of having them support their local communities.  If the Foundation was to take these funds, it would break those agreements, and jeopardize future sponsorship opportunities.

Topic #5 - The “Chapters Don’t Spend Their Funds” Fallacy
It has been brought up a number of times now by both the Board and the staff that the “ring fenced” funds mentioned above are caused by chapters not actively spending their funds. In fact, slide 38 of the most recent town hall presentation proves that this is not the case.  The “Chapter Net Income” line clearly shows a trend of earning and spending over time.  The “Chapter Balance” line shows that the overall chapter account balance has consistently been decreasing this year and stayed fairly stagnant over the course of past years.  More importantly, this chart very clearly shows that it is almost exclusively the annual AppSecUSA profit split that is causing the overall increase in chapter balances.  The chapters therefore believe that it would be more pertinent to have these conversations around the profit sharing splits of the AppSec conferences, as opposed to any discussions about taking existing chapter funds or limiting the ways a chapter can raise funds.



Topic #6 - Fundraising
Chapters have limited opportunities to raise money.  We get a percentage of membership, a percentage of sponsorships, and a percentage of local or regional event profits.  The only one of these fundraising efforts, however, that simultaneously accomplishes OWASP’s Core Purpose of education is holding local and regional events.  And, as we saw above, these regional events currently contribute roughly $30,000 per year back to the OWASP Foundation.  Changing the profit sharing splits would significantly hamper the ability for many of our chapters to operate as they do today.  It would also significantly reduce the incentive for our chapters to start and run these kinds of events in the future.  The chapters do not believe that we should be limiting the opportunities for chapters to raise money or diminishing the incentives to do so.

Topic #7 - Scalability of OWASP
It has become more and more evident that OWASP is not designed to scale with the current model.  While the staff continues to propose adding additional staff to solve the problem, we fail to see how more staff solves many of the inherent issues with how OWASP functions today.  The staff have no formal plan behind this.  No observations about what roles we need to hire or how these additional staff would be utilized.  Simply a message of “hire staff….problems solved.”  While there’s no doubt that Dawn and Matt work incredibly hard, we’re not convinced that employing 5x more people like them would solve our current growing pains.  The chapters believe that the only true way for OWASP to be able to fulfill the varying needs of our chapters is for the Foundation to find ways to decentralize authority and action at varying levels of our organization.  We believe that while centralized unity is required for a shared “service framework”, there are significant strengths and resiliencies that can only be realized through decentralization.  One such way to accomplish this goal would be to implement a committee of chapter leaders and to empower them with the ability to act on behalf of the Foundation.  To that end, we support the current proposal to form a Global Chapters Committee and would look toward that group to identify any additional staffing needs to support the chapters.  Overall, we feel that the Foundation should be responsible for oversight and coordination of its activities while the actual plan and implementation should be executed by our community of volunteers with support from the OWASP staff.

Topic #8 - Reporting Integrity
It is very clear that the goal of these town hall meetings is to set a narrative around the financial woes of OWASP and how the staff believes we need more money to hire more people to fix the problems.  One Gene Kim quote, in particular, stood out in the presentation saying “To tell the truth is an act of love.  To withhold the truth is an act of hate.  Or worse, apathy.”  We can only assume that the motivation behind including this quote is to make it sound like the staff is being completely straightforward with the data presented.  Unfortunately, we have no way to draw these conclusions for ourselves as the actual data has been withheld, but reports like the one below are worrisome to us.  Clearly, this is designed to make us feel like our operating expenses dwarf our income sources and there’s a large chapter allocation that could be used to address this.  What we’ve noticed, however, is that OWASP’s single largest revenue stream, our Global conferences, has been left out of this picture.  We see membership, donations, and [regional] events, but why isn’t the additional $640,000 revenue from our Global Conferences displayed on this chart?  Once that is factored in, the income bar on this chart becomes $1,418,232 and we go from a total deficit of $523,425 to a total profit of $116,575.  If charts like this are being presented, lacking all of the data points to make an informed decision, how can we possibly have open an honest discussion on this topic and move closer to a “One OWASP” model?


Topic #9 - Global Event Profit Sharing
The staff put forth a plan in the second town hall meeting outlining a proposed way to handle finances for OWASP Global Events.  It says that a budgeted surplus will go to the Foundation and additional surplus is equally divided between chapters and projects.  We believe that it is fully within the Foundation’s rights to control these global events as they see fit.  This includes establishing profit splits to meet whatever funding goals that the Foundation has.  That said, the Foundation should think long and hard before considering this, as removing a split for the chapter running the event nullifies the incentive to do so.  We would strongly encourage additional discussions on this topic as it is an area with a lot of flexibility and the right solution has the potential to fix the major issue mentioned in #5, above.

Topic #10 - Local and Regional Event Profit Sharing
There does not appear to be any consensus amongst chapter leaders that a 70/30 split would be considered reasonable, especially with respect to the chapters who run local and regional events.  While a compromise was proposed on the second town hall call that could give chapters the funding they need while using excess funds to innovate and assist others, ultimately, we believe that this is a perfect topic for the proposed Global Chapters Committee to discuss and try to come to a consensus on.  We do not believe that the current plan from the staff represents the desires of the chapters community and would like the opportunity to discuss and propose our own plan once the committee has been approved. 

We, as a united front of OWASP leaders, bring up these topics not out of angst or malice, but out of the belief that by having an open and honest discussion about the problems plaguing OWASP, we can bridge some of these gaps and move closer to the “One OWASP” model that the staff has called out throughout these town halls.  We’re not there yet, but we believe that by addressing the above topics of concern, we will be able to realize the change that OWASP so desperately needs.

Sincerely,

Travis McPeak (Bay Area)
Josh Sokol (Austin)
Sandeep Singh (Delhi)
Avi Douglen (Israel)
